Module: Working with Remote Repositories

Assignment Title:
Managing Code with Remote Git Repositories

1. Push Code to GitHub

Create or use an existing Git repository and make sure it is connected to a GitHub remote repository.

Check the remote connection:

git remote -v

Check the current branch:

git branch

If the current branch is main, push the code using:

git push -u origin main

The git push command uploads local commits to the remote GitHub repository.

After pushing, open the GitHub repository and verify that the latest files and commits are available.

2. Pull Updates from GitHub

When changes are made to the remote repository by another developer, those changes can be downloaded using:

git pull origin main

The git pull command downloads the latest changes from the remote repository and integrates them into the current local branch.

Before pulling changes, it is recommended to check the current status:

git status

3. Clone a GitHub Repository

Git clone is used to create a local copy of an existing remote repository.

Example:

git clone https://github.com/USERNAME/project-name.git

Move into the cloned project:

cd project-name

Check the repository status:

git status

The cloned repository contains the project files, Git history, and remote configuration.

4. Understanding origin

"origin" is the default name Git usually gives to the remote repository when a repository is cloned or when a remote is added.

For example:

origin  https://github.com/USERNAME/project-name.git

The origin name allows developers to refer to the remote repository without repeatedly typing its complete URL.

Example:

git push origin main

This means:

Push the main branch to the remote repository named origin.

5. Understanding main

"main" is commonly used as the primary branch of a Git repository.

It generally contains the main or stable version of the project.

Example:

git push origin main

This means that the local main branch is being pushed to the main branch of the remote repository named origin.

6. Difference Between origin and main

origin and main represent different things.

origin:
- Refers to the remote repository.
- Usually represents the GitHub repository.
- Is a remote repository name.

main:
- Refers to a branch.
- Usually represents the primary branch of the project.
- Contains the project's main development history.

For example:

git push origin main

origin = Remote GitHub repository
main = Branch being pushed

7. Real-Life Collaboration Workflow

A typical team collaboration workflow can be:

Step 1: Clone the Repository

A developer gets the project from GitHub:

git clone https://github.com/USERNAME/project-name.git

Step 2: Create a Feature Branch

The developer creates a separate branch:

git switch -c feature-login

Step 3: Make Changes

The developer implements the required feature and tests the code.

Step 4: Stage and Commit Changes

git add .
git commit -m "Add login feature"

Step 5: Push the Feature Branch

git push -u origin feature-login

Step 6: Create a Pull Request

The developer creates a Pull Request on GitHub so that other team members can review the changes.

Step 7: Review and Merge

After the code is reviewed and approved, the feature branch is merged into the main branch.

Step 8: Pull the Latest Changes

Other developers update their local main branch:

git switch main
git pull origin main

This keeps everyone's local project updated with the latest code.

8. Common Remote Repository Commands

Push local changes:

git push origin main

Pull remote changes:

git pull origin main

Clone a repository:

git clone <repository-url>

View remote repositories:

git remote -v

Add a remote:

git remote add origin <repository-url>

View branches:

git branch

9. GitHub Connected

A repository is successfully connected to GitHub when the local Git repository has a remote named origin pointing to the GitHub repository.

Verify the connection using:

git remote -v

Example:

origin  https://github.com/USERNAME/project-name.git (fetch)
origin  https://github.com/USERNAME/project-name.git (push)

After successful push and pull operations, the local and remote repositories can be kept synchronized.

10. Submission Requirements

Students should submit:

- Screenshot showing the GitHub repository.
- Screenshot of git remote -v.
- Screenshot showing a successful git push.
- Screenshot showing a successful git pull.
- Screenshot showing git clone.
- Explanation of origin and main.
- Explanation of a real-life Git collaboration workflow.
- Relevant terminal command outputs.
